What if we face a situation
in which we have access to nothing?
We are not allowed
to have a Bible,
no literature with illustrations,
no videos,
and no audio recordings.
What do we do?
Our recollection
of what we have read in the past
can keep our spirituality intact.
One of our brothers from Russia
faced such a situation.
Notice what helped him.
The year was 1963.
I was 36 at the time.
The KGB searched my home
and found some Bible literature
and some publishers’ field service reports.
So I was sentenced
to five years of imprisonment
for being an organizer.
That was the third time
I had been imprisoned.
Some brothers and sisters
and I went to the court
to support Brother Vladimir.
When he saw us,
he clasped his hands
and declared,
“Everything is fine!”
A KGB officer told me
that the only reason
I hadn’t been imprisoned
was because I had six children.
But Vladimir was single.
I was just glad
that they had arrested me and not him,
because I didn’t have a family.
In the camp, I didn’t have a Bible
or any Bible literature at all.
All I had to keep me going
was the knowledge I already had.
We prayed for him,
and we sent greetings
and encouraging messages
to him through his relatives.
Due to the strict censorship
in the camp,
we were not allowed
to write anything spiritual in our letters
to encourage each other.
If we did,
the letters were confiscated.
But I really wanted to send Brother Mikhail
something encouraging.
I was growing flowers
with a group of inmates in the camp.
So instead of a sending him a letter,
I decided to send him
a bouquet of flowers.
Vladimir’s sister Olga came to our home,
and she brought me a beautiful bouquet
of flowers from Vladimir.
I couldn’t believe
that I had received fresh flowers
from behind a barbed-wire fence
—from inside the camp.
I was so touched
by his act of kindness
that my heart moved me
to write down some verses,
a poem,
which I called “The Bouquet.”
My relatives came
and visited me in the prison
and delivered to me the poem.
I kept the poem
in a very secret place.
It could have been confiscated,
and I could have been punished
because it was about God.
After Vladimir was released from prison,
well, he told me that my poem
had really strengthened him
and that he had often taken it out
of its secret hiding place
to read it over and over again.
If it hadn’t been for the support
I received from Jehovah
and the prayers of friends,
it would have been much harder
for me to serve my time.
The poem that I had received
helped me not to feel
separated from my friends
and, most importantly,
from Jehovah.
So many years have now gone by.
But we have remained firm
through the difficult times,
and we continue serving Jehovah.
Lately, Vladimir and I have been trying
to keep in touch by phone,
but we haven’t seen each other
for seven years.
I would really love
to see Vladimir again.
He doesn’t know
that I’ve decided to go and visit him.
I hope that he likes the surprise.
“I see these flowers,
grown by hands
“Hardened from work
that prison demands.
“My friend has sent a bouquet.
“Prison three times
prevented our meeting,
“But you found a way
to convey a greeting.
“My joy now moves me to say:
“‘Greetings, my brother,
with all of my heart.
“‘You gave me strength,
although we’re apart.
“‘While you have
countless trials withstood,
“‘You’ve strengthened me
as best you could.
“‘Greetings, my friend
on that narrow road,
“‘You were always with me
through hardships untold.
“‘We worked so hard
for spiritual treasure.
“‘Blessed we were
for sticking together.
“‘Cruelly, my friend,
you were taken from me
“‘When they tried
to break our integrity.
“‘But God stood by us
and helped us to cope.
“‘Conquer the evil, we did,
for our dear Kingdom hope.
“‘How grateful we are
and always will be
“‘For spiritual vision
by which we can see
“‘The crown of life
promised to those
“‘Who stay on the loyal course
they chose.
“‘How much you’ve endured,
long-suffering friend.
“‘But Jehovah’s mercy
will never end.
“‘On a paradise earth
our hands will unite,
“‘Planting more flowers
to gladden His sight.
“‘Christ Jesus will heal us
during his reign,
“‘So no trace of sin
will ever remain.
“‘And far from the trials
that we overcame,
Forever we’ll praise
Jehovah’s great name!’”
True friends are such a blessing
from Jehovah,
and you don’t really know
who they are until disaster strikes.
During my whole life,
walking in the way of the truth,
I have often thought
about the words of Psalm 119:63,
where it says:
“I am a friend of all who fear you
and of those who keep your orders.”
Our serving side by side
in the Kingdom work
has strengthened our friendship.
It is only that sort of friendship
that will last forever!
What a beautiful friendship!
Our brotherhood truly is
a blessing from Jehovah.
Brother Mikhail Savitsky spent many years
as a circuit overseer,
helping the Kingdom work progress
in Siberia, northern Caucasus,
and the countries
of Georgia and Armenia.
In 1992, he had the privilege
of being one of those
who signed the documents that confirmed
legal recognition of our work in Russia.
However, we regret to inform you
that some time
after this segment was produced,
Brother Vladimir Varkholik
fell asleep in death.
He was 88 years old
and had served Jehovah faithfully
for over 59 years.
At the time of his death,
he had served as a pioneer
for some 26 years
and as an elder
in the congregation for 43 years.
From his interview,
you can clearly see the faith
that kept his spirituality strong
through 12 years of imprisonment.
And he is a good example for us.
Did you notice one aspect
of his circumstances while incarcerated?
He said:
“In the camp,
I didn’t have a Bible
“or any Bible literature at all.
“All I had to keep me going
was the knowledge I already had.”
That could happen to us.
When persecution starts,
we need to be prepared.
That’s one reason
why it is so important
not to neglect
our study of the Bible
while we have the opportunity.